So today, we are going to talk about,
er, community detection in networks.
So basically, what community detection is,
is essentially clustering a set of nodes,
uh, in a graph.
So, uh, this is what we are, uh,
going to do today and the clustering we are going
to do will be based on the net structure,
er, of the network.
So, let's start, uh,
by defining this pro-, er,
problem of community detection and then I'm going actually to talk to you about-
about some social science research that explains why do we see these,
uh, clusters in networks,
why do they make sense,
and they actually inform the development of the methods,
er, to be able to do this.
So, um, when we write,
er, or when we draw, er, networks, let's say,
on a- on a piece of paper, we often, er,
would like to think of them to have kind of the following,
uh, the following structure, right?
We think of them as having these, uh, clusters,
these communities where the- the edges inside the cluster are more,
um, are more than the edges, er,
spanning, uh, across, uh, the clusters.
And this is kind of how intuitively we like to think of networks,
in particular social networks perhaps where
these types of clusters could correspond to social communities.
We think of them in terms of- in biological networks.
We can think of these as some kind of, uh, functional units,
modules that are there to do a certain task, um, and so on.
So, we'd like to think that the networks are not just kind of messy objects,
but that they have this kind of clustering, uh, org- organization.
So the question is,
how did this picture, uh, arise?
What kind of evidence do we have that these types of structure
actually appears in networks and what could be some reasons for it?
So, um, here is one way to think about this from the viewpoint of, er, social networks.
So right now what we'll do is we're going to do a bit of
a dive in into classical social science and classical,
er, social network analysis.
So the question is,
how does information flow through networks?
Think of a social network, right,
where basically we have people connected in a social network and
there are different links over which the information flows.
And let's call these links short and long.
Um, and let's call them, you know,
short as the ones that kind of are- are a very kind of, er, local.
These are strong friendships,
and let's also have these long links that you- which we can think of as
links to our acquaintances and kind of colleagues and people we,
let's say, meet, uh, less often.
And the way we can think of this is that, you know,
we have these short, er, short, er,
strong links and we have these weak, er,
long links, er, to other parts,
er, of the network.
So, uh, there was a seminal work, er,
back in 1960s, uh, by Mark Granovetter,
who's a sociologist here at Stanford University,
and this is I think the most,
er, cited and the most impactful,
uh, social science paper ever.
And this is really about his research during his PhD,
where he was asking about,
how do people find information through personal contacts?
Um, and, um, what- he was looking at this,
how people find jobs.
So he was asking people who were on the job market to basically- and have found a job to,
er, to tell him, where did you hear about this job?
Which, er, which person did you tell- tell you about- about this job opening?
How did you apply, things like that.
And, uh, what was interesting is that, um,
contacts through which these people heard for job openings and
found jobs were more often acquaintances than,
let's say, close friends, right?
So it wasn't that you would, uh,
hear that people heard about new job openings
from people they have very strong relationship with that, you know,
they spend a lot of time together,
but they heard about new job openings through these,
um, acquaintances, people that would- they would kind of meet less, uh, more rarely.
Um, and this is very surprising because you
would imagine that it is actually your friends,
people you have strong, er, relationships with,
whose- whose best interest is to help you,
who are closest to you,
who are the most motivated to help you find,
uh, a job, to connect you,
uh, with the job openings, and so on.
But what turned out was that it was actually
casual acquaintances who- who- through which,
um, through whom, uh,
the- these job seekers found about, er, new jobs.
So what this means is if we go back to the- to the picture that we had before,
it was that- basically,
it was this- these types of,
let say, acquaintance links,
these weak links, uh,
to- to have, uh,
to be the ones through which people heard about the jobs and
not necessarily these kind of strong, uh, interpersonal links.
So this means that acquaintances are more,
uh, were more helpful in this process.
And the question was, why?
And Granovetter gave these two perspective on a friendship or on a link in the network.
So the first struct- the- the first perspective on a link in the network is structural.
It's about, what is the structural role of a link in the network?
So you can think about,
what is the structural role of a friendship in a social network, right?
We can think about this particular edge being this kind of, um,
connecting different parts of the network,
while this particular other edge being very well embedded,
uh, inside the network, right?
Having all these common friends and being a really strong, uh, relationship.
So that's kind of structural.
And then there is also the interpersonal, er,
view which is about, er,
friendships being either kind of strong or weak, right?
Having a very strong relationship with someone or having a much,
er, weaker relationship with,
uh, uh, each other.
And, uh, what Granovetter shows is that structural and interpersonal,
uh, relationship of the link,
they- they are connected.
They- they are related to each other.
So, uh, let me explain how.
So first, uh, point is that Granovetter makes the connection between the
social and the structural role of an edge and shows that they are related,
they are correlated, they are connected.
So first is the structural point, right?
The structural, um, edge from, uh, er,
from the point of e- edge being in the network, um,
he basically say- shows that structurally embedded edges,
so edges, uh, that,
uh, that happen among co-, er,
in the- in the densely-linked parts
of the network where there is a lot of common friends,
that these edges tend to be strong edges like inter-personally strong.
And that these long-range edges that kind of connect the different parts of the network,
they tend to be socially weak, right?
So, um, what does this mean?
This means that, um,
there is a relationship between the strength of
the relationship and the structure of the relationship.
So strength means, uh, strong links, er,
between people who have a lot of friends in common,
and weak links connecting different parts of the network, right?
So weak friendships are ge- generally the ones that
connect different parts of the network and strong friendships are the ones that- that,
uh, where you have, um,
a lot of friends in common, and so on.
And what I want to say is,
strong friendship is not defined by having a lot of friends in common.
You can ask someone who are your strongest friends,
and then if you check in the social network,
you will see these are the people you have a lot of friends in common.
So these are the structurally strong, uh,
structurally well embedded relationships are socially strong and structurally,
um, uh, kind of di- the relationships that connect different parts of the network,
they are socially weak.
So those are- those are two connections,
two important aspects of a relationship.
So social strength of a relationship and
a structural role or position of the relationship,
that's the first point.
And then, the second important point that
Granovetter makes is this notion of information flow.
And he says that long-range edges allow you to gather
information from very different distant parts,
uh, of the network.
Uh, and this means that now you have access to
all these distant information that can come to you and can be very useful to you, right?
And, er, he says that structurally embedded edges are
heavily re- redundant in terms of information access, right?
So if you think that, I don't know,
this person A is, uh,
is an edge in the network and they are looking for, er, jobs, yes,
they have these three strong, uh,
social relationships with these three- three other people,
but essentially, these relationships are very redundant, right?
Whatever, uh, one of these people knows,
they can either tell them to node A directly,
or perhaps, you know,
they are going through casual conversations sa- tell it
to this other node who's going to tell it to node A.
So in terms of information access,
these edges are heavily redundant.
Well, for example, this weak long-range
edge to some other part of the network to this node B,
this is a very useful edge because it gives you access to
all this information from these other, uh, community.
So this is the second point,
is that strongly embedded edges are information redundant and it
is weak edges that give you access to very dif- distant parts,
uh, of the relationship,
uh, of the network.
Um, and this is important because if you look how social networks evolve, um,
they evolve such as the communities form,
in a sense that net- tightly-connected clusters of nodes naturally form.
And the reason for this is that, um,
the networks tend to evolve using triadic closure.
What that means is that,
if you have two friends in common,
you know, A has a friend B,
and A has a friend C,
then sooner or later A and B are going to meet and they are going to create,
uh, a link with each other.
Another important aspect is that we like to
connect with others that are similar to us, right?
So if I am, I don't know, a computer scientist,
or maybe I like soccer, football, right?
Maybe I play football with node B,
probably I may- play football with node C as well,
so they already will have something in common so they can,
uh, form that relationship, right?
So this is, um,
an important thing is that because we like to connect to others that are similar to us,
so if I'm connected to two other people,
they likely share some similarities,
some aspects to myself.
This means that they're alw- also going to share that similarity,
so they'll be more likely to bond,
uh, and create, uh, an edge.
So it means in networks,
these are the edges that,
uh, that ha- that like to form.
So for example, uh,
A to B is a likely edge, um, and, you know,
to- also A to C because there is a fr- a common friend,
uh, B, uh, in between.
So these are examples of edges that, uh, uh,
that are-, uh, happen to in social networks, uh, a lot.
So now, you know,
why is- why are some reasons that these types of edges happen?
Because if you remember early on we were talking about clustering coefficient, right?
The fraction of your neighbors that are connected with each other.
And this is essentially a metric of this notion of a triadic closure.
Because if we have this simple network structure,
uh, here, uh, on the right,
then you can say, you know,
if B and C have a friend A in common,
so why should B and C link to each other?
First is, they are more likely to meet each
other because they have this common friend,
uh, A, and maybe he invites them both,
uh, for the coffee or something.
Second thing is B and C are more likely to trust each other because again,
they have this common friend that they both trust so they say,
"Oh, you have this guy, uh,
as a friend, I- I like him,
you like him, obviously we have something in common."
And then there is also another important point,
which is A has incentive to bring,
uh, B, and C together, right?
Because from A's point of view,
it is hard or costly,
it requires effort to maintain, uh,
two relationships, uh, together,
uh, for, uh for, uh, Node A.
So if there is a triangle,
so if A links to B, B links to C,
then all of them basically can go and hang out together because they are all friends.
So these are reasons for, uh, triadic closure.
And that is an important aspect,
is that actually social science research shows that being embedded,
having a lot of the strong edges and a lot of triangles around you,
um, is, uh, is, ah, is, ah,
kind of, um, is- is- is easier, warmer, um,
it's, ah, this is what,
ah, what humans, ah, seek for.
And actually, for example,
there is a famous study, um,
of, uh, teenage girls who have,
for example, low clustering coefficient.
They are, uh, they are found to more likely contemplate suicide.
So basically right, it is hard to not have friends who are friends with each other.
So it's good to be well embedded in social clusters.
That's kind of the social structures, uh,
we humans, uh, seek.
So now, uh, this, uh,
Granovetter explanation was a theory from the 60's, right?
Basically what he said was the following.
He said, edges that are embedded in the network,
so edges that have high clustering coefficient,
edges that have a lot of,
uh, friends in common,
edges that uh, uh,
appear in dense parts of the network,
these edges tend to be socially strong.
And edges that connect distant parts of the network,
they tend to be socially weak.
Um, and this is a prediction he made,
um, based on his research,
but it was left untested for,
er, 40 plus years.
And actually it was only in 2007 that this theory, uh,
was actually, uh, kind of validated on real large-scale data.
And the study is based on cell phone,
uh, data, uh, from one of the European countries.
So where you say the strength of a relationship,
strength of an edge will be the number of phone calls,
um, that- that we make in a given period, right?
And the idea is that people who are strong friends with you will make
a lot of phone calls with and people you are more acquaintances with,
maybe you call them for Christmas, uh, and, you know,
wish them a Happy New Year, for example,
that would be, you know, once in a year type of, uh, phone call.
So the prediction from Granovetter would be that strong edges should be, uh,
these edges with lots of phone calls should be clustered together in, uh, small pockets,
and then these edges that, uh, that, uh,
that span across different parts of the network,
there the number of,
uh, um, uh, phone calls, uh, will be smaller.
That's the prediction. The way- the way, uh,
this was operationalized was first to say,
um, the notion of, uh, you know,
how, uh, how strong or weak is the edge structurally,
uh, and you quantify this by the metric called edge overlap.
And simply you ask,
what is the fraction of neighbors that edge endpoints have in common, right?
So for example here,
the edge overlap is 0 because these nodes i and j have no friends in common,
while here, for example,
this is an overlap of 1 because they have all these- all these neighbors,
each of them, and they are both mutually connected to all of them.
So here we would say this edge is very well embedded, uh,
it is structurally strong,
and this edge is structurally weak, right?
It kind of connects to different parts of the network that don't know each other.
Right? And then, um,
what Granovetter would say that when edges have low overlap, the, um,
the number of phone calls will be very small and when edges have high overlap,
the number of, uh, phone calls, uh, will be very high.
Here is now the, uh, the result.
Uh, this is the edge strength in terms of number of phone calls.
Uh, and this is the neighborhood overlap.
Uh, and this is the real data.
And what you see is that the strong- the more the phone calls,
the higher the overlap,
which means that highly used links,
links where a lot of phone calls happen have high overlap, right?
So links where there is a high number of,
uh, phone calls, uh, look like this,
and links where there is a lower number or phone calls have smaller overlap,
so they are structurally, uh, like that.
Um, and then here what, also, uh,
they show is an example of a null model
where they would basically keep the network structure the same,
but randomly reassign the edge strands.
And then you see that there is no,
uh, relationship, just two, uh,
and this is expected and it's just kind
of a safety check to make sure that this analysis makes sense.
So what this means is that, you know,
the bigger the overlap,
the stronger the edge personally.
To give you a picture that is even more telling
is that here is a part of this phone call network.
And this is the strength of the edge.
Red is very strong and yellow,
green is- is weak in terms of number of phone calls.
And what you see is that these red edges
tend to happen in these kind of small clumps here.
And you see that these long edges,
they are mostly yellow,
which means there is a small number of phone calls that happens over them.
And just to show you the contrast, now,
I will show you the picture of the same network,
but I'm going to randomly shuffle,
uh, edge strengths across the same structure.
Um, and what you will see is that now all of a sudden,
this is how the network, uh, looks like, right?
So if I randomly assign edge strengths according to the real edge strengths,
you see how now these long-range- long-range edges,
all of a sudden start to look, uh, red.
And why is this? This is the reason because there is a lot of
edges- strong grid edges hidden in
these clusters and they jus- you just don't get to see them.
Uh, and these all these long-range edges, they are all yellow.
They all have very small numbers or phone calls in them.
But if you now take these edge strengths and randomly permute them,
randomly assign them over the edges,
then this is how the network would look like.
Like all of a sudden, uh,
you see that there is actually a lot of long-range,
er, red edges that we don't- just don't see in, uh, practice.
So what does this mean?
Uh, this means that,
uh, edges that are strong, uh,
interpersonally appear in clu- in densely knit clusters,
and edges that are weak connect different parts,
uh, of the network.
And, uh, another experiment to validate this is to say,
what if I take my network and I remove edges one by one, uh, uh,
by the decreasing, um, sorry,
by the increasing number of, uh, phone calls, right?
First I will remove edges with one phone call,
then two phone calls and so on.
And then here is how I'm removing edges.
And here he is, uh,
how does my network fall apart into different connected components, right?
So as I'm removing edges,
the network will start to get disconnected.
And what you notice is that if I remove uh,
first the edges that have low number of phone calls,
the- the network is going to fall apart into multiple disconnected components,
um, much faster, if I would,
for example, remove, uh, highly, um, uh,
edges that are highly used because those edges are embedded in these- in these clusters.
So even if I remove them,
I don't disconnect the network.
But if I disconnect- if I remove these weak edges,
then the network gets disconnected, uh, faster.
The largest connected component is smaller,
so the red line is below, uh, the black line.
Um, um, an- and then if I do something
similar according let's say now out to the edge overlap where I say,
let's remove edges with low overlap first,
you see how now the largest connected component super quickly, uh, gets destroyed,
which basically the intuition is that if I remove the slow overlap edges,
very quickly, uh, I get these separate islands,
separate disconnected, uh, components.
So, um, you know,
why- why did we spend, uh,
uh, these 20 minutes discussing about all these?
Like what did we learn?
What we learned is that
this conceptual picture of networks that I try to sh- that I show here,
um, is actually well-grounded in sociological,
uh, processes and social science.
What we have also found out is that the interpersonal strength of a relationship and its,
uh, overlap, it, uh,
embedding in the network,
uh, are related, right?
So we- we showed,
uh, that these type of, uh,
nodes, uh, and these types of edges that have high overlap,
that have a lot of friends in common,
these tend to be interpersonally strong connections
and that edges with low overlap or zero overlap,
that kind of connect different parts of the network,
they tend to be weak,
they tend to be, um, you know,
um, don't have high, uh, strength.
So, uh, this is now, uh,
very cool because this intuition can serve us to identify this type of, uh,
bridge connections and be able to, uh,
separate and be able to identify,
uh, the clusters, uh, in the network.
